<pre>
DCP: 0009
Title: Automatic Ticket Revocations
Author: Ryan Staudt <mail@ryanstaudt.com>
Status: Defined
Created: 2021-08-25
License: CC0-1.0
License-Code: ISC
</pre>

==Abstract==

This proposes modifications to Decred ticket revocation transactions and block
acceptance criteria in order to support automatic ticket revocations.

The main changes are:

* Requiring that revocation transactions are version <code>2</code> transactions
* Requiring that revocation transaction inputs have empty signature scripts
* Requiring the revocation transaction fee to be zero
* Updating the ticket redeemer output amounts calculation for revocations
* Skipping script validation for revocation transactions
* Requiring blocks to contain revocation transactions for all tickets that will become missed or expired as of that block

==Motivation==

Two primary goals motivate the proposed changes:

* Improve the Decred stakeholder user experience by removing the requirement for stakeholders to manually revoke missed and expired tickets
* Enable the recovery of funds for users who lost their redeem script for the legacy VSP system (before the release of vspd, which removed the need for the redeem script)

==Specification==

===Revocation Transactions===

This proposal defines the following rule updates for revocation transactions:

* The revocation transaction version MUST be <code>2</code>
* The revocation transaction fee MUST be zero
* The single input for revocation transactions MUST have an empty signature script

All other existing revocation transaction rules still apply.

===Ticket Redeemer Output Amounts Calculation===

This proposal defines updated rules specifying how ticket redeemer output
amounts are calculated for revocation transactions.  The updated rules apply
only to revocation transactions and NOT vote transactions.

When revoking a ticket, the original ticket contribution amounts must first be
evenly distributed to each output of the revocation transaction.

After the contributions are distributed evenly, there may be a remainder of
<code>1</code> to <code>numOutputs - 1</code> atoms.  Each atom in the remainder
must be added to an output index that is selected in a deterministic uniformly
pseudorandom manner, as described below.

The pseudorandom selection requires a constant value that is known to all full
nodes.  This constant is derived from the hex representation of the mathematical
constant Pi (𝜋) and acts as a publicly verifiable nothing-up-my-sleeve number.
The constant that is used is <code>0x243F6A8885A308D3</code>.

For a revocation being included into a block at height <code>N+1</code>, the
remainder should be added to outputs as follows:
# Initialize variables to be used in the deterministic pseudorandom number generation as follows:
## Construct the initial 32-byte <code>seed</code> as follows:
### Concatenate the serialized raw bytes of the header of block <code>N</code> with the constant value <code>0x243F6A8885A308D3</code>
### Hash the result from the previous step with <code>BLAKE-256</code>
## Initialize a hash: <code>hash = seed</code>
## Initialize a hash iterator index: <code>hashIterIdx = 0</code>
## Initialize a hash offset: <code>hashOffset = 0</code>
## Initialize <code>upperBound</code> to the number of outputs in the revocation transaction
##: NOTE: The maximum allowed number of outputs for a revocation transaction, and therefore the maximum <code>upperBound</code>, is <code>64</code>
# For each atom in the remainder:
## Select a uniformly random integer <code>i</code> in the range <code>[0, upperBound)</code> as follows:
### While <code>r < 2^32 % upperBound</code>
#### Select a random 32-bit integer, <code>r</code>, as follows:
##### Take a 4-byte slice of the <code>hash</code> between positions <code>hashOffset</code> and <code>hashOffset+4</code>: <code>hash[hashOffset:hashOffset+4]</code>
##### Assign the big endian 32-bit unsigned integer representation of the result of the previous step to <code>r</code>
##### Increment <code>hashOffset</code> by <code>1</code>
##### If <code>hashOffset > 7</code>, then "rollover" the hash as follows:
###### Set <code>hash</code> to the <code>BLAKE-256</code> hash of the <code>seed</code> concatenated with the <code>hashIterIdx</code>
###### Set <code>hashOffset = 0</code>
###### Increment <code>hashIterIdx</code> by <code>1</code>
### Calculate <code>i = r % upperBound</code> to get the uniformly random integer <code>i</code> in the range <code>[0, upperBound)</code>
## Increment the payout amount of the output at index <code>i</code> by <code>1</code>

===Skipping Script Validation for Revocation Transactions===

Script validation MUST be skipped for version <code>2</code> revocation
transactions.

=== Ticket Revocation Eligibility ===

Revocations may spend tickets that are missed or expired as of or prior to the
block in which they are included.

===Requiring Blocks to Contain Revocation Transactions===

Blocks MUST contain revocation transactions for all tickets that will become
missed or expired as of that block.

==Rationale==

===Bumping the Revocation Transaction Version===

Requiring the transaction version to be <code>2</code> for revocations as part
of this proposal provides multiple benefits.

First, it allows for rejecting revocation transactions that are not version
<code>2</code>, and therefore do not conform to the updated rules, early before
doing any additional processing of that transaction.

Further, if there are no version <code>2</code> revocations included in blocks
before the agenda activates, and the agenda has activated, then the updated
consensus rules could be retroactively updated to be guarded by the transaction
version rather than the agenda.  This is desirable because it doesn't require
passing around whether the agenda is active, which itself is based on the
blockchain global state, and instead could just be based on the transaction
itself.

===Enforcing Zero Fee for Revocation Transactions===

There must be a rule to limit the revocation transaction fee since the updated
rules allow tickets to be revoked by anyone.  There is not a strong reason to
allow a non-zero fee since it will be enforced that blocks MUST contain version
<code>2</code> ticket revocation transactions.

Further, fees on revocations could potentially create a misalignment of
incentives in the future when the block rewards are exhausted.  For instance, if
the amount earned from an additional non-mandatory vote is less than the amount
that could be earned from a revocation transaction, then miners could be
incentivized to not include a non-mandatory vote and instead include a
revocation.

===Ticket Redeemer Output Amounts Calculation===

In order to enforce zero fees for revocation transactions, the ticket redeemer
output amounts calculation needs to be updated.

Since multiple inputs can be used to purchase a ticket, each one contributes a
portion of the overall ticket purchase, including the transaction fee.  Thus,
when claiming the ticket, either due to it being selected to vote or being
revoked, each output must receive the same proportion of the total amount
returned.

After the original contribution amounts are evenly distributed to each output,
there may be a remainder of <code>1</code> to <code>numOutputs - 1</code> atoms.
The current rule is that this remainder is not added to any of the outputs, and
it ends up as part of the transaction fee.  A side effect of this rule is that
an exact fee cannot be easily specified since it may end up being slightly
higher than desired due to the remaining atoms included in the transaction fee.
This needs to be modified in order to accommodate the proposed rule change that
requires revocation transaction fees to be zero.

This proposal uses deterministic uniformly pseudorandom selection to select an
output to receive each atom in the remainder in order to ensure that the output
selection cannot be gamed.  The method used for the uniform pseudorandom
selection was chosen since it is well-proven and already in place for the ticket
selection lottery.

Due to the fact that this entire process is deterministic, each full node in the
network is able to independently calculate the same set of outputs, giving nodes
a trustless method of validating that outputs for the remaining atoms were
selected in a pseudorandom manner.

===Skipping Script Validation for Revocation Transactions===

Skipping script validation for version <code>2</code> revocation transactions
allows anyone, including miners, to create ticket revocations.  Further, it
allows for the recovery of funds for users who lost their redeem script for the
legacy VSP system.

There is no risk of theft of funds in allowing tickets to be revoked by anyone
since ticket revocation transactions MUST pay to the address specified by the
original commitment in the ticket.

=== Ticket Revocation Eligibility ===

Currently, the earliest that revocation transactions are eligible to be spent is
in the block ''following'' the block in which the ticket was missed or expired.
Subsequently, the current rule is that the earliest that revocation transactions
are eligible to be spent is after <code>ticket maturity + 2 blocks</code>, where
the <code>+ 2</code> represents the block after the entire ticket maturity has
passed, plus an additional block since the ticket could not have been missed or
expired until another block has passed.

In order to require blocks to contain revocations for tickets that will become
missed or expired as of that block, this rule must be updated to allow
revocations to spend tickets that are missed or expired ''as of'' or prior to
the block in which they are included.

===Requiring Blocks to Contain Revocation Transactions===

Requiring blocks to contain ticket revocation transactions makes the whole
revocation process automatic, resulting in a better user experience for
stakeholders.  The updated rules for revocations described in this proposal
enable this possibility since version <code>2</code> ticket revocation
transactions can be created by anyone, including miners, since they will not
require a valid signature.

==Deployment==

This agenda will be deployed to mainnet using the standard Decred on-chain
voting infrastructure as follows:

{|
!Name!!Setting
|-
|Deployment Version||9
|-
|Agenda ID||autorevocations
|-
|Agenda Description||Enable automatic ticket revocations as defined in DCP0009
|-
|Start Time||1631750400 (Sep 16th, 2021 00:00:00 +0000 UTC)
|-
|Expire Time||1694822400 (Sep 16th, 2023 00:00:00 +0000 UTC)
|-
|Mask||0x0060 (Bits 5 and 6)
|-
|Choices||{|
!Choice!!English Description!!Bits
|-
|abstain||abstain voting for change||0x0000
|-
|no||keep the existing consensus rules||0x0020 (Bit 5)
|-
|yes||change to the new consensus rules||0x0040 (Bit 6)
|}
|}

==Compatibility==

This is a hard-forking change to the Decred consensus.  This means that once
the agenda is voted in and becomes locked in, anybody running code that fully
validates blocks must upgrade before the activation time, or they will risk
rejecting a chain containing a transaction that is invalid under the old rules.

Other software that performs full validation will need to modify their consensus
enforcement rules accordingly, and any software that deals with the current
version of ticket revocation transactions will need to be updated to handle the
changes specified herein.

==Reference Implementation==

===Deterministic Uniformly Pseudorandom Selection===

A reference implementation of the required deterministic uniformly pseudorandom
selection is implemented in
[[https://github.com/decred/dcrd/blob/dabe6074e4ab08ab58312728e393540a9f6c2106/blockchain/stake/lottery.go#L17-L141|stake/lottery.go]].

===Pull Requests===

====Consensus Enforcement====

A reference implementation of enforcing the new semantics in accordance with the
results of the agenda vote is implemented by
[[https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2720|pull request #2720]].

====Deployment====

A reference implementation of the required agenda definition is implemented by
[[https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/2718|pull request #2718]].

==Acknowledgements==

Thanks to Dave Collins ([[https://github.com/davecgh|@davecgh]]) for helpful
discussions regarding many of the design details.

===Collaborators===

Thanks to the following individuals who provided valuable feedback during the
review process of this proposal (alphabetical order):

* Dave Collins ([[https://github.com/davecgh|@davecgh]])
* degeri ([[https://github.com/degeri|@degeri]])
* Joe Gruffins ([[https://github.com/JoeGruffins|@JoeGruffins]])
* Matheus Degiovani ([[https://github.com/matheusd|@matheusd]])

==References==

===Inline References===

<references/>

===Additional References===

# [[https://proposals.decred.org/record/e2d7b7d|Politeia Proposal - Automatic Ticket Revocations Consensus Change]]

==Copyright==

This document is licensed under the
[https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0 CC0-1.0: Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal]
license.

The code is licensed under the [https://opensource.org/licenses/ISC ISC License].
